http://stackoverflow.com/questions/11790504/about-a-pyqt-example-program

4.2.1. When Painting Occurs

The paintEvent() method is called automatically when
- Your widget is shown for the first time.
- After a window has been moved to reveal some part (or all) of the widget.
- The window in which the widget lies is restored after being minimized.
- The window in which the widget lies is resized.
- The user switches from another desktop to the desktop on which the widget's window lies.

You can generate paint events manually by calling QWidget::update(). 
QWidget::update() erases the widget before generating the paint event. 
You can pass arguments to update(), which can restrict painting only to areas (rectangles, in particular) that need it. 
The two equivalent forms of the method are QWidget::update (int x, int y, int width, int height) 
and QWidget::update (QRect rectangle), where x and y give the upper-left corner of the rectangle, 
and width and height are obvious. 
Because update() places a paint event into the event queue, no painting occurs until the current method exits and control returns to the event handler. 
This is a good thing because other events may be waiting there to be processed, and events need to be processed in a timely manner for the GUI to operate smoothly.

You can also invoke painting of the widget by calling QWidget::repaint (int x, int y, int width, int height, bool erase) 
(or one of several convenience-method forms), where all the arguments mean the same as in the case of the update() method, 
and erase tells repaint whether to erase the rectangle before painting it. 
repaint() calls paintEvent() directly. It does not place a paint event into the event queue, so use this method with care. 
If you try to call repaint() repeatedly from a simple loop to create an animation, for example, 
the animation will be drawn, but the rest of your user interface will be unresponsive 
because the events corresponding to mouse button clicks, keyboard presses, and so on will be waiting in the queue. 
Even if you are not performing a task as potentially time-consuming as animation, it is generally better to use update() to help keep your GUI alive.

If you paint something on your widget outside the paintEvent(), you still need to include the logic and commands necessary to paint that same thing in paintEvent(). 
Otherwise, the painting you did would disappear the next time the widget is updated.
